Sumac Release Notes (#622)
openedx/docs.openedx.org: source/community/release_notes/sumac/dev_op_release_notes.rst

   - Additional Considerations: Commerce app itself is slated for deprecation nevertheless.
- `courseware.enable_navigation_sidebar <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/blob/38f73442e78a8b9afb5543facd170dca830acb1a/lms/djangoapps/courseware/toggles.py#L86>`_  is now enabled by default. It was disabled by default in Redwood.

- New Forums Implementation (migration from Ruby to Python forums backend)

   - For users running Tutor, they will automatically switch to the new app. Instructions to migrate data from mongodb to mysql is available in the plugin README https://github.com/overhangio/tutor-forum/ (not yet merged, see `feat: upgrade to sumac <https://github.com/overhangio/tutor-forum/pull/49/files>`_).

   - Users not running Tutor will by default remain on the legacy `cs_comments_service` app. They need to read this part of the forum app README: https://github.com/openedx/forum?tab=readme-ov-file#forum-v2-toggle Some settings need to be defined even for legacy app users.

> Settings and Toggles

Reviewer: I'm not clear on what this is a list of. Are these all new settings and toggles? "new and updated" ? 

Were there any settings and toggles removed?

Author: I don't understand the question. This was the list of new/updated toggles @mariajgrimaldi was kind enough to help me generate.

There were a TON of removals as documented in https://github.com/openedx/wg-build-test-release/issues/398:
```
COURSEGRAPH_DUMP_COURSE_ON_PUBLISH
FEATURESENABLE_LIBRARY_AUTHORING_MICROFRONTEND
FEATURESENABLE_V2_CERT_DISPLAY_SETTINGS
commerce.transition_to_coordinator.checkout
commerce.transition_to_coordinator.refund
contentstore.library_authoring_mfe
discussions.enable_reported_content_notifications
learner_dashboard.enable_b2c_subscriptions
notifications.enable_coursewide_notifications
notifications.enable_notifications_filters
notifications.enable_ora_staff_notifications
notifications.show_notifications_tray
studio.enable_course_update_notifications
BLOCKSTORE_BUNDLE_CACHE_TIMEOUT
BUNDLE_ASSET_STORAGE_SETTINGS
BUNDLE_ASSET_URL_STORAGE_KEY
BUNDLE_ASSET_URL_STORAGE_SECRET
BLOCKSTORE_BUNDLE_CACHE_TIMEOUT
COURSEGRAPH_CONNECTION
COURSEGRAPH_JOB_QUEUE
```

In that issue I asked if anyone thought any of these needed explanation.

Do you think they should be included in a separate Toggles/settings removed" section?

Happy to do whatever works. Fighting to nail jell-o to a tree here.

Reviewer 2: I would love to see that list of removed toggles included as a separate section.

Author: Change is waiting on a ReadTheDocs build.

Breaking Changes
****************

No breaking changes in Sumac.

User Facing Experiences
*************************

See the :doc:`feature_release_notes` for more detail on user-facing changes in this release.

Administrators & Operators
**************************

- Most search functionality included in the core platform now supports Meilisearch as an alternative to Elasticsearch. For instances deployed using Tutor, only Meilisearch is supported, and Tutor will automatically provision Meilisearch and create the indexes during the upgrade.

>    - Two recent features, Studio Course Search and the new Content Libraries (beta), require Meilisearch and will be hidden from the UI if Meilisearch is not available. (For the Content Libraries beta, this affects only the UI - developers can still use the APIs without Meilisearch.)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   - Two recent features, Studio Course Search and the new Content Libraries (beta), require Meilisearch and will be hidden from the UI if Meilisearch is not available. (For the Content Libraries beta, this affects only the UI - developers can still use the APIs without Meilisearch.)
   - The new Content Libraries (beta) can be hidden entirely in Sumac by setting the waffle flag `contentstore.new_studio_mfe.disable_new_libraries` to "Yes". This option will be removed in Teak.
```

>    - After upgrading, if you wish to use the new Content Libraries (beta) or Studio Course Search features, you will need to run ``manage.py cms reindex_studio --experimental --incremental`` to populate the new Studio Search index with your existing content (courseware/libraries). Studio search results will be incomplete until this command has finished.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   - After upgrading, if you wish to use the new Content Libraries (beta) or Studio Course Search features, you will need to run ``manage.py cms reindex_studio --experimental --incremental`` to populate the new Studio Search index with your existing content (courseware/libraries). Studio search results will be incomplete until this command has finished.
   - A new media storage setting is required for new Content Library file storage. This should be specified as `OPENEDX_LEARNING['MEDIA']`. Tutor will [provide this setting automatically](https://github.com/overhangio/tutor/blob/33d2bc2c71e3cd30545417afb18ba2bd989a19fd/tutor/templates/apps/openedx/settings/partials/common_all.py#L251-L258), and can be used as an example for those who are running different infrastructure. For those not running Tutor, _please ensure that the file storage location is not publicly accessible_.
```

> Breaking Changes

Reviewer 4: On Lines 5-6 there are dates for the release span (May 10 - October 23) - are those dates the accurate ones? @cmltaWt0 or @farhaanbukhsh ?

Reviewer 4: It looks like Sumac was cut on November 5th, and Redwood on May 10th. Unfortunately I can't make a suggestion here because the diff is too far up, but L6 should say

"to November 5, 2024"

@feoh

Reviewer 5: My comment is a bit late, but the Sumac master branch was created on October 24.

@sarina ^

Reviewer 5: Redwood master was cut on May 9, 2024.
So the correct line could be `spanning changes from May 9, 2024
to October 24, 2024`.

****************

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

No breaking changes in Sumac.

```

I would add this line IF it is true, because otherwise reading the rendered page it's a bit unclear how the headers nest. But I want to check in on this - @arbrandes @bradenmacdonald @regisb @feanil - no breaking changes in Sumac? Who else should I tag?

Reviewer 4: @feoh I didn't mean for you to commit this at this time. We need to check if there are any breaking changes.

Author: Crap itchy trigger finger. Unresolving. Will fix if people find breaking changes.

Author: > @feoh I didn't mean for you to commit this at this time. We need to check if there are any breaking changes.

I know, I'm sorry :) I'll fix it if people raise anything but I'm not going to create a revision to fix a thing which in fact may not be broken :) I'll stay on top of this and ensure the page reflects reality. Sorry for prematurely pulling the trigger!

Reviewer 6: There is atleast https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/pull/35185 which should be captured here as a breaking change.

Reviewer 6: Oh, you're right, it was merged just after. Right in that case, I think there is nothing that I'm aware of that's breaking in Sumac.

Administrators & Operators
**************************

> - Most search functionality included in the core platform now supports Meilisearch as an alternative to Elasticsearch. For instances deployed using Tutor, only Meilisearch is supported, and Tutor will automatically provision Meilisearch and create the indexes during the upgrade.

Reviewer 4: >  For instances deployed using Tutor, only Meilisearch is supported

Is this a breaking change?

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what it would "break". The related functionality will continue to work more or less the same, just using a different backend. I guess if they are running some additional app/module that expects to piggyback the platform's ElasticSearch index, operators would now need to deploy Elasticsearch separately but I don't think that's really an officially supported use case anyways.

Reviewer 4: If you are upgrading from an old Tutor instance pre-Meilisearch, (say, Olive), will you be forced to convert to Meilisearch?

Reviewer 4: Edit: I guess it's not breaking, but it's a bit not clear to me that ES will be dropped and I can't use it so maybe a tad bit more explicit would help.

>   - After upgrading, you need to run `manage.py cms reindex_studio --experimental --incremental` to populate the new Studio Search index with your existing content (courseware/libraries). Studio search results will be incomplete until this command has finished.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - After upgrading, you need to run ``manage.py cms reindex_studio --experimental --incremental`` to populate the new Studio Search index with your existing content (courseware/libraries). Studio search results will be incomplete until this command has finished.
```

Sorry, I suck at RST.

Author: No need to apologize. ReStructuredText is a festering carbuncle of a markup language and I hate it with flaming hate-e-os. :)

Reviewer 2: Ugh, I wonder how much more documentation we'd have if we let people write it in Markdown...

Reviewer 7: Oh come on, it's not that bad!

>    - After upgrading, you need to run ``manage.py cms reindex_studio --experimental --incremental`` to populate the new Studio Search index with your existing content (courseware/libraries). Studio search results will be incomplete until this command has finished.

Reviewer 4: A required upgrade has you run with an `experimental` flag??

Reviewer 2: Ah, I guess you don't _need_ to run it. It should say "If you wish to use the new Content Libraries (beta) or Studio Course Search features, you'll need to run..."

> - `Course assets should be served by a view rather than a middleware <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/issues/34702>`_

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `Course assets are now served by a view rather than a middleware <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/issues/34702>`_
```

   - Background: The LMS/CMS previously handled course asset requests (asset-v1: andc4x URLs) via a middleware called StaticContentServer. This middleware has been converted to a view.

>    - Action: If your deployment has a custom MIDDLEWARE list in Django, you will need to remove this item at the time of upgrade to Sumac. Otherwise, no action is needed..

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   - Action: If your deployment has a custom MIDDLEWARE list in Django, you will need to remove this item at the time of upgrade to Sumac. Otherwise, no action is needed.
```

Reviewer 4: I might put this under breaking change

- Ubuntu 22.04 Related Operators Note
   - `PR <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/pull/35450>`_
   - In newer versions of ubuntu the MD4 hashing algorithm is disabled by default. To enable it the openssl config needs to be updated in a manner similar to what's being done here. Alternatively, you can set the FEATURES['ENABLE_BLAKE2B_HASHING'] setting to True which will switch to a newer hashing algorithm where MD4 was previously used.
      Because this hashing is being used as a part of the edx-platform caching mechanism, this will effectively clear the cache for the items that use this hash. The will impact any items where the cache key might have been too big to store in memcache so it's hard to predict exactly which items will be impacted.

>    - Added override options to commerce related CTA URLs in edx-platform

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Added override options to commerce related CTA URLs in edx-platform
```

>    - Background: Extension points have been added have been added to commerce app in: `PR1 <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/pull/35441>`_, `PR2 <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/pull/35501>` so openedX community members who wants to extend the commerce functionality can do so without explicitly adding code into edx-platform codebase. For more information into extension points see Pluggable override section in `Extension Points <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/blob/master/docs/concepts/extension_points.rst>`_.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   - Background: Extension points have been added have been added to commerce app in: `PR1 <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/pull/35441>`_, `PR2 <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/pull/35501>` so Open edX community members who wants to extend the commerce functionality can do so without explicitly adding code into edx-platform codebase. For more information into extension points see Pluggable override section in `Extension Points <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/blob/master/docs/concepts/extension_points.rst>`_.
```

Reviewer 4: Fix "openedX" to "Open edX", and fix PR2 link

>    - Additional Considerations: Commerce app itself is slated for deprecation nevertheless.

Reviewer 4: Link to DEPR ticket would be good

Author: @sarina Thanks! Whose cage should I politely rattle to figure out which DEPR to link here please? :)

Reviewer 4: @feanil

Reviewer 6: The original DEPR was here: https://github.com/openedx/public-engineering/issues/22

There is not one yet for the commerce app which we'll likely leave in for a bit longer.

Author: @feanil @sarina I'm super confused about how to handle this.

The current block says:

```
- Added override options to commerce related CTA URLs in edx-platform
   - Background: Extension points have been added have been added to commerce app in: `PR1 <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/pull/35441>`_, `PR2 <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/pull/35501>`_ so Open edX community members who wants to extend the commerce functionality can do so without explicitly adding code into edx-platform codebase. For more information into extension points see Pluggable override section in `Extension Points <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/blob/master/docs/concepts/extension_points.rst>`_.
   - Additional Considerations: Commerce app itself is slated for deprecation nevertheless.
```

Where do I link that DEPR in? And do I just delete the "Additional Considerations" bullet?

Signed, 
-Living In A State of Confusion

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   - Additional Considerations: Commerce app itself is slated for deprecation. `See the associated DEPR ticket <https://github.com/openedx/public-engineering/issues/22>`_. 
```

>    - `courseware.enable_navigation_sidebar <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/blob/38f73442e78a8b9afb5543facd170dca830acb1a/lms/djangoapps/courseware/toggles.py#L86>`_  is now enabled by default. It was disabled by default in Redwood.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `courseware.enable_navigation_sidebar <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/blob/38f73442e78a8b9afb5543facd170dca830acb1a/lms/djangoapps/courseware/toggles.py#L86>`_  is now enabled by default. It was disabled by default in Redwood.
```

Reviewer 4: Dedent this so it's not nested under the previous bullets (see https://docsopenedxorg--622.org.readthedocs.build/en/622/community/release_notes/sumac/dev_op_release_notes.html)

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

- New Forums Implementation (migration from Ruby to Python forums backend)
```

> For users running Tutor, they will automatically switch to the new app. Instructions to migrate data from mongodb to mysql is available in the plugin README https://github.com/overhangio/tutor-forum/ (not yet merged, see this PR).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   - For users running Tutor, they will automatically switch to the new app. Instructions to migrate data from mongodb to mysql is available in the plugin README https://github.com/overhangio/tutor-forum/ (not yet merged, see this PR).
```

> Users not running Tutor will by default remain on the legacy cs_comments_service app. They need to read this part of the forum app README: https://github.com/openedx/forum?tab=readme-ov-file#forum-v2-toggle Some settings need to be defined even for legacy app users.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   - Users not running Tutor will by default remain on the legacy `cs_comments_service` app. They need to read this part of the forum app README: https://github.com/openedx/forum?tab=readme-ov-file#forum-v2-toggle Some settings need to be defined even for legacy app users.
```

Administrators & Operators
**************************

- Most search functionality included in the core platform now supports Meilisearch as an alternative to Elasticsearch. For instances deployed using Tutor, only Meilisearch is supported, and Tutor will automatically provision Meilisearch and create the indexes during the upgrade.

>    - After upgrading, you need to run ``manage.py cms reindex_studio --experimental --incremental`` to populate the new Studio Search index with your existing content (courseware/libraries). Studio search results will be incomplete until this command has finished.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   - After upgrading, if you wish to use the new Content Libraries (beta) or Studio Course Search features, you will need to run ``manage.py cms reindex_studio --experimental --incremental`` to populate the new Studio Search index with your existing content (courseware/libraries). Studio search results will be incomplete until this command has finished.
```

- Added override options to commerce related CTA URLs in edx-platform
   - Background: Extension points have been added have been added to commerce app in: `PR1 <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/pull/35441>`_, `PR2 <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/pull/35501>` so openedX community members who wants to extend the commerce functionality can do so without explicitly adding code into edx-platform codebase. For more information into extension points see Pluggable override section in `Extension Points <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/blob/master/docs/concepts/extension_points.rst>`_.
   - Additional Considerations: Commerce app itself is slated for deprecation nevertheless.
   - `courseware.enable_navigation_sidebar <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/blob/38f73442e78a8b9afb5543facd170dca830acb1a/lms/djangoapps/courseware/toggles.py#L86>`_  is now enabled by default. It was disabled by default in Redwood.

> - New Forums Implementation (migration from Ruby to Python forums backend)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- New Forums Implementation (migration from Ruby to Python forums backend)

```
Needs this blank line to fix the build error

- Added override options to commerce related CTA URLs in edx-platform
   - Background: Extension points have been added have been added to commerce app in: `PR1 <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/pull/35441>`_, `PR2 <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/pull/35501>` so openedX community members who wants to extend the commerce functionality can do so without explicitly adding code into edx-platform codebase. For more information into extension points see Pluggable override section in `Extension Points <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/blob/master/docs/concepts/extension_points.rst>`_.
   - Additional Considerations: Commerce app itself is slated for deprecation nevertheless.
   - `courseware.enable_navigation_sidebar <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/blob/38f73442e78a8b9afb5543facd170dca830acb1a/lms/djangoapps/courseware/toggles.py#L86>`_  is now enabled by default. It was disabled by default in Redwood.

- New Forums Implementation (migration from Ruby to Python forums backend)

>    - For users running Tutor, they will automatically switch to the new app. Instructions to migrate data from mongodb to mysql is available in the plugin README https://github.com/overhangio/tutor-forum/ (not yet merged, see this PR).

Reviewer 4: @regisb what PR should this link to?

Reviewer 7: https://github.com/overhangio/tutor-forum/pull/49/files

Deprecations & Removals
***********************

- In `frontend-app-learner-dashboard <https://github.com/openedx/frontend-app-learner-dashboard>`_ 
   - support for Optimizely has been removed along with the ProductRecommendations widget.
   - `DEPR: Optimizely Support <https://github.com/openedx/frontend-app-learner-dashboard/issues/387>`_
   - Removed the RecommendationsPanel widget
   - `DEPR: RecommendationsPanel <https://github.com/openedx/frontend-app-learner-dashboard/issues/410>`_
- In edx-platform:
   - ``commerce-coordinator`` related code has been removed
   - `PR: <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/pull/35527>`_

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [UPCOMING] In Teak pre-design-tokens brand packages will no longer be supported. With design tokens, theme authors will instead override core Paragon tokens by defining their own JSON tokens that get deep merged alongside the core Paragon tokens, thus overriding any tokens that were defined by the theme author. See `the associated DEPR ticket for details <https://github.com/openedx/brand-openedx/issues/23>`_.
```

Deprecations & Removals
***********************

- In `frontend-app-learner-dashboard <https://github.com/openedx/frontend-app-learner-dashboard>`_ 
   - support for Optimizely has been removed along with the ProductRecommendations widget.
   - `DEPR: Optimizely Support <https://github.com/openedx/frontend-app-learner-dashboard/issues/387>`_
   - Removed the RecommendationsPanel widget
   - `DEPR: RecommendationsPanel <https://github.com/openedx/frontend-app-learner-dashboard/issues/410>`_
- In edx-platform:
   - ``commerce-coordinator`` related code has been removed
   - `PR: <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/pull/35527>`_

> - [UPCOMING] In Teak pre-design-tokens brand packages will no longer be supported. With design tokens, theme authors will instead override core Paragon tokens by defining their own JSON tokens that get deep merged alongside the core Paragon tokens, thus overriding any tokens that were defined by the theme author. See `the associated DEPR ticket for details <https://github.com/openedx/brand-openedx/issues/23>`_.

Reviewer 7: We should mention here the fact that the cs_comments_service application is being replaced by forum: 
https://github.com/openedx/cs_comments_service/issues/437
https://github.com/openedx/forum

For users running Tutor, they will automatically switch to the new app. Instructions to migrate data from mongodb to mysql is available in the plugin README https://github.com/overhangio/tutor-forum/ (not yet merged, see [this PR](https://github.com/overhangio/tutor-forum/pull/49/files#diff-7b3ed02bc73dc06b7db906cf97aa91dec2b2eb21f2d92bc5caa761df5bbc168f)).

Users not running Tutor will by default remain on the legacy cs_comments_service app. They need to read this part of the forum app README: https://github.com/openedx/forum?tab=readme-ov-file#forum-v2-toggle Some settings need to be defined even for legacy app users.

If you need more information please get in touch.

Author: I added a line pointing to the DEPR issue. If you think more of your descriptive verbage needs to go in please suggest a change and I'll commit it :)

Thank you!

Deprecations & Removals
***********************

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

- The existing "Content Libraries" feature has been renamed to "Legacy Libraries" and will be deprecated in the next release (Teak), and removed entirely in release after Teak in favor of the new "Content Libraries" feature. The Teak release will include a tool for migrating content from Legacy Libraries into new Content Libraries.
```

   - `DEPR: Optimizely Support <https://github.com/openedx/frontend-app-learner-dashboard/issues/387>`_
   - Removed the RecommendationsPanel widget
   - `DEPR: RecommendationsPanel <https://github.com/openedx/frontend-app-learner-dashboard/issues/410>`_
- In edx-platform:
   - ``commerce-coordinator`` related code has been removed
   - `PR: <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/pull/35527>`_
- [UPCOMING] In Teak pre-design-tokens brand packages will no longer be supported. With design tokens, theme authors will instead override core Paragon tokens by defining their own JSON tokens that get deep merged alongside the core Paragon tokens, thus overriding any tokens that were defined by the theme author. See `the associated DEPR ticket for details <https://github.com/openedx/brand-openedx/issues/23>`_.
- The cs_comments_service application is being replaced by forum. `[DEPR]: Replace cs_comments_service #437 <https://github.com/openedx/cs_comments_service/issues/437>`_
- The Zooming Image Tool will be deprecated in Sumac. `[DEPR] Zooming Image Tool (HTML block template) #31436 <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/issues/31436>`_

Developer Experience

> ********************

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
********************

- With the launch of the new Content Libraries feature, many new or updated APIs are now ready for developers to start using (though some are in beta and may change). This includes the entire `Learning Core API <https://github.com/openedx/openedx-learning/blob/main/openedx_learning/api/authoring.py>`_ (Components, Contents, Publishing, Collections), `Content Tagging API <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/blob/master/openedx/core/djangoapps/content_tagging/api.py>`_, `Content Libraries API <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/blob/master/openedx/core/djangoapps/content_libraries/api.py>`_, and `Learning Core XBlock API <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/blob/master/openedx/core/djangoapps/xblock/api.py>`_. Most of these APIs (other than tagging) are only useful in content libraries at the moment, but when courseware is eventually moved to Learning Core as well, the Learning Core APIs will be recommended way to work with all learning content in the platform, and the modulestore APIs will be deprecated.
```

Deprecations & Removals
***********************

> - The existing "Content Libraries" feature has been renamed to "Legacy Libraries" and will be deprecated in the next release (Teak), and removed entirely in release after Teak in favor of the new "Content Libraries" feature. The Teak release will include a tool for migrating content from Legacy Libraries into new Content Libraries.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- The existing "Content Libraries" feature has been renamed to "Legacy Libraries" and will be deprecated in the next release (Teak), and removed entirely in Ulmo in favor of the new "Content Libraries" feature. The Teak release will include a tool for migrating content from Legacy Libraries into new Content Libraries.
```

Developer Experience
********************

- With the launch of the new Content Libraries feature, many new or updated APIs are now ready for developers to start using (though some are in beta and may change). This includes the entire `Learning Core API <https://github.com/openedx/openedx-learning/blob/main/openedx_learning/api/authoring.py>`_ (Components, Contents, Publishing, Collections), `Content Tagging API <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/blob/master/openedx/core/djangoapps/content_tagging/api.py>`_, `Content Libraries API <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/blob/master/openedx/core/djangoapps/content_libraries/api.py>`_, and `Learning Core XBlock API <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/blob/master/openedx/core/djangoapps/xblock/api.py>`_. Most of these APIs (other than tagging) are only useful in content libraries at the moment, but when courseware is eventually moved to Learning Core as well, the Learning Core APIs will be recommended way to work with all learning content in the platform, and the modulestore APIs will be deprecated.

> Researcher & Data Experiences

Reviewer 4: @bmtcril anything to add about Aspects in the developer release notes?

Reviewer 8: @crathbun428 was collecting notes, but I'm not sure if they belong here or where they were going.

Reviewer 4: Right, Chelsea has user-facing notes. Are there things developers or operators (more technical audience) should know, as they upgrade from Redwood?

Reviewer 9: Yep - [these feature release notes](https://docs.openedx.org/en/latest/community/release_notes/sumac/aspects_comp_dashboard.html) are live. I was planning on linking to this section of the operator release notes from the feature release notes. I had checked in with Brian about any changes to this section and it seems this section we had last time may still work as I believe all of the linked documents have been updated.
---
[Aspects](https://docs.openedx.org/projects/openedx-aspects/en/latest/index.html) is an analytics system for the Open edX platform, bringing actionable data about course and learner performance to instructors and site operators. It is primarily a Tutor plugin that ties together data from the Open edX learning management system and Studio using open source tools to aggregate and transform learning traces into data visualizations.

See the [Aspects configuration documentation](https://docs.openedx.org/projects/openedx-aspects/en/latest/technical_documentation/how-tos/production_configuration.html) to learn about setting up Aspects for your production environment.
----
Do I have that right, @bmtcril ?

Author: Folks I want to keep this *laser focused* on dev/ops stuff if I can please.

Seems like there are no updates for me to make here? Yell if you disagree and I'll resolve tomorrow otherwise :)

Thanks everyone for chiming in! Appreciate all the feedback.

Reviewer 4: I wouldn't generically point at Aspects configuration docs. However, I would mention anything operators who are _already_ running Aspects in Redwood need to do to upgrade to Sumac.

Reviewer 4: And further, if it Just Works (TM), I would say that as well (eg, "Migration of Aspects from Redwood to Sumac requires no operator intervention")

Reviewer 9: Thanks, @sarina  

@bmtcril, I know you've likely told me this before, but is there anything operators who are already running Aspects in Redwood need to do to upgrade to Sumac? Or should it just work with no operator intervention?

Reviewer 8: There is no requirement to upgrade Aspects for Sumac, it versions separately from named releases. We can put in a suggestion that people upgrade to `v1.3.1` to get the latest functionality, however, and link the [upgrade doc](https://docs.openedx.org/projects/openedx-aspects/en/latest/technical_documentation/how-tos/upgrade.html).

Developer Experience
********************

- With the launch of the new Content Libraries feature, many new or updated APIs are now ready for developers to start using (though some are in beta and may change). This includes the entire `Learning Core API <https://github.com/openedx/openedx-learning/blob/main/openedx_learning/api/authoring.py>`_ (Components, Contents, Publishing, Collections), `Content Tagging API <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/blob/master/openedx/core/djangoapps/content_tagging/api.py>`_, `Content Libraries API <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/blob/master/openedx/core/djangoapps/content_libraries/api.py>`_, and `Learning Core XBlock API <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/blob/master/openedx/core/djangoapps/xblock/api.py>`_. Most of these APIs (other than tagging) are only useful in content libraries at the moment, but when courseware is eventually moved to Learning Core as well, the Learning Core APIs will be recommended way to work with all learning content in the platform, and the modulestore APIs will be deprecated.

Researcher & Data Experiences
*****************************

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

Upgrading Aspects to v1.3.1 will get you the latest Aspects functionality with Sumac. `See the upgrade instructions here <https://docs.openedx.org/projects/openedx-aspects/en/latest/technical_documentation/how-tos/upgrade.html>`_.
```

- In `frontend-app-learner-dashboard <https://github.com/openedx/frontend-app-learner-dashboard>`_ 
   - support for Optimizely has been removed along with the ProductRecommendations widget.
   - `DEPR: Optimizely Support <https://github.com/openedx/frontend-app-learner-dashboard/issues/387>`_
   - Removed the RecommendationsPanel widget
   - `DEPR: RecommendationsPanel <https://github.com/openedx/frontend-app-learner-dashboard/issues/410>`_
- In edx-platform:
   - ``commerce-coordinator`` related code has been removed
   - `PR: <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/pull/35527>`_
- [UPCOMING] In Teak pre-design-tokens brand packages will no longer be supported. With design tokens, theme authors will instead override core Paragon tokens by defining their own JSON tokens that get deep merged alongside the core Paragon tokens, thus overriding any tokens that were defined by the theme author. See `the associated DEPR ticket for details <https://github.com/openedx/brand-openedx/issues/23>`_.
- The cs_comments_service application is being replaced by forum. `[DEPR]: Replace cs_comments_service #437 <https://github.com/openedx/cs_comments_service/issues/437>`_

> - The Zooming Image Tool will be deprecated in Sumac. `[DEPR] Zooming Image Tool (HTML block template) #31436 <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/issues/31436>`_

Reviewer: If/when https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/pull/36012 gets merged, this line about the Zooming Image Tool can be removed.

> - The Zooming Image Tool will be deprecated in Sumac. `[DEPR] Zooming Image Tool (HTML block template) #31436 <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/issues/31436>`_

Author: OK. Someone may need to make a post merge change for that depending on timing. Happy to help as always.

> - The Zooming Image Tool will be deprecated in Sumac. `[DEPR] Zooming Image Tool (HTML block template) #31436 <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/issues/31436>`_

Author: I'm going to resolve this for now. If anything concrete happens we can make that change at that time :)

Deprecations & Removals
***********************

- The existing "Content Libraries" feature has been renamed to "Legacy Libraries" and will be deprecated in the next release (Teak), and removed entirely in Ulmo in favor of the new "Content Libraries" feature. The Teak release will include a tool for migrating content from Legacy Libraries into new Content Libraries.
- In `frontend-app-learner-dashboard <https://github.com/openedx/frontend-app-learner-dashboard>`_ 
   - support for Optimizely has been removed along with the ProductRecommendations widget.
   - `DEPR: Optimizely Support <https://github.com/openedx/frontend-app-learner-dashboard/issues/387>`_
   - Removed the RecommendationsPanel widget
   - `DEPR: RecommendationsPanel <https://github.com/openedx/frontend-app-learner-dashboard/issues/410>`_
- In edx-platform:
   - ``commerce-coordinator`` related code has been removed
   - `PR: <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/pull/35527>`_

> - [UPCOMING] In Teak pre-design-tokens brand packages will no longer be supported. With design tokens, theme authors will instead override core Paragon tokens by defining their own JSON tokens that get deep merged alongside the core Paragon tokens, thus overriding any tokens that were defined by the theme author. See `the associated DEPR ticket for details <https://github.com/openedx/brand-openedx/issues/23>`_.

Reviewer: another upcoming

```
[UPCOMING] Between now and the release of Teak, all Dockerfiles will be removed from the Open edX
organization. As an alternative, Tutor provides `production-ready Docker images`
<https://hub.docker.com/u/overhangio/>_ for all supported Open edX services. And each Open edX service
repository should contain documentation describing how it can be installed and executed, allowing anyone to write
a Dockerfile that provisions the repository. See `the associated DEPR ticket for details
<https://github.com/openedx/public-engineering/issues/263>`_. 
```

- The cs_comments_service application is being replaced by forum. `[DEPR]: Replace cs_comments_service #437 <https://github.com/openedx/cs_comments_service/issues/437>`_

> - The Zooming Image Tool will be deprecated in Sumac. `[DEPR] Zooming Image Tool (HTML block template) #31436 <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/issues/31436>`_

Reviewer: Another deprecation: 

The EdxRestApiClient` has been deprecated and removed in this release. See `[DEPR]: Complete removal of EdxRestApiClient` <https://github.com/openedx/public-engineering/issues/189>_ for details.

Reviewer: more deprecations

```
The Demographics app has been removed. It was added to support a private edX Demographics IDA for collecting additional user info. See `[DEPR]: Demographics Django app #35127 <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/issues/35127>`_.

Reviewer: Ok, one comment for the rest:

```
- The programs_listing endpoint in the credentials application has been removed. `[DEPR]: /program-listing endpoint <https://github.com/openedx/credentials/issues/2642>`_.
- The skill_level endpoint has been removed `[DEPR]: endpoint /user/v1/skill_level/{job_id}/ <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/issues/35302>`_.
- [UPCOMING] The Toggle 'block_structure.storage_backing_for_cache' will be removed, with a default setting of True. You may want to test enabling in Sumac before it becomes the default behavior in Teak. See `[DEPR]: block_structure.storage_backing_for_cache in edx-platform <https://github.com/openedx/public-engineering/issues/32>`_.
- 
```

This is everything from the most recent [DEPR WG meeting](https://openedx.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/COMM/pages/3996745737/DEPR+Meeting+Notes+2024). There may be additional new items in [Next Release: Sumac - Operator/Dev Notes ](https://openedx.atlassian.net/wiki/x/AQCw-g)

- The EdxRestApiClient has been deprecated and removed in this release. See `[DEPR]: Complete removal of `EdxRestApiClient <https://github.com/openedx/public-engineering/issues/189>`_ for details. 
- The Demographics app has been removed. It was added to support a private edX Demographics IDA for collecting additional user info. See `[DEPR]: Demographics Django app #35127 <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/issues/35127>`_.
- The programs_listing endpoint in the credentials application has been removed. `[DEPR]: /program-listing endpoint <https://github.com/openedx/credentials/issues/2642>`_.
- The skill_level endpoint has been removed `[DEPR]: endpoint /user/v1/skill_level/{job_id}/ <https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/issues/35302>`_.
- [UPCOMING] The Toggle 'block_structure.storage_backing_for_cache' will be removed, with a default setting of True. You may want to test enabling in Sumac before it becomes the default behavior in Teak. See `[DEPR]: block_structure.storage_backing_for_cache in edx-platform <https://github.com/openedx/public-engineering/issues/32>`_.

> - As part of the `Oscare Ecommerce Stack deprecation <https://github.com/openedx/public-engineering/issues/22>`_ , the following repositories have been archived:

Author: This PR is already over the fence but I'll fix this in a new one and AT you :)
